\input amigatexinfo
\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@setfilename FlexCat_english.guide
@settitle FlexCat @value{VERSION}    Documentation
@setchapternewpage off

@c  $VER: FlexCat_english.texinfo 2.6
@c
@c  FlexCat:                  The flexible catalog generator
@c  Copyright (C)  1993-1999  Jochen Wiedmann and Marcin Orlowski
@c
@c  This program is free software.
@c
@c  This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
@c
@c  This file contains the english documentation.
@c
@c  Computer:   Amiga 1200                  Compiler:   DICE V2.07.54 (3.0)
@c
@c  Autor:      Jochen Wiedmann
@c              Am Eisteich 9
@c              72555 Metzingen
@c
@c
@c  Computer:   Amiga 4000                  Compiler:   SAS/C V6.58
@c
@c              Since v1.8 program is developed by
@c
@c              Marcin Orlowski
@c              ul. Radomska 38
@c              71-002 Szczecin
@c              Poland
@c
@c              e-mail: carlos@amiga.com.pl
@c              WWW   : http://amiga.com.pl/flexcat/
@c

@set VERSION 2.6
@iftex
@parskip=0.75em
@end iftex
@c %**end of header


@titlepage

@title{FlexCat}
@subtitle{The flexible catalog generator}
@subtitle{}
@subtitle{Version @value{VERSION}}
@author Jochen Wiedmann and Marcin Orlowski
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@tex
@halign{@hfil#&#@hfil@cr
       Since release 1.8 FlexCat is developed by:@cr
@cr
       & Marcin Orlowski@cr
       & ul. Radomska 38@cr
       & 71-002 Szczecin@cr
       & Poland@cr
@cr
       & carlos@@amiga.com.pl@cr
       & http://amiga.com.pl/flexcat/@cr
@cr
FlexCat is oryginally created by:@cr
@cr
       & Jochen Wiedmann@cr
       & Am Eisteich 9@cr
       & 72555 Metzingen@cr
       % Deutschland
}
@end tex

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this manual
and the program FlexCat.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file by TeX and print the results,
provided the printed document carries a copying permission notice identical to
this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this paragraph not being
relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

The author gives @strong{absolutely no} warranty that the program described
in this documentation and the results produced by it are correct. The
author cannot be held responsible for @strong{any} damage resulting from
the use of this software.
@end titlepage
@iftex
@headings double
@end iftex


@ifinfo
@node Top
@top FlexCat V@value{VERSION} Documentation
This file describes the Usage of FlexCat V@value{VERSION}, a program which
generates catalogs and the source to handle them. FlexCat works similar to
@code{CatComp} and @code{KitCat}, but differs in generating any source you
want. This is done by using the so called @code{Source descriptions}, which
are a template for the code to generate. They can be edited and hence
adapted to any programming language and individual needs. (Hopefully!)

@menu
General:

* Disclaimer::           Copyrights, (NO) warranty
* Overview::             What is FlexCat?
* Installation::         How can I get it working?

Using FlexCat:

* Program start::        Calling FlexCat from the CLI
* Preferences::          Changing FlexCat default behaviour
* Catalog description::  Catalog description files (@key{.cd}-files)
* Catalog translation::  Catalog translation files (@key{.ct}-files)
* Source description::   Source description (@key{.sd}-files)
* Using FlexCat source:: Using FlexCat source in own programs

Unnecessities:

* Future::               Further development of FlexCat
* Support::              Where to look for updates
* History::              History of development
* Credits::              What I always wanted to say@dots{}
* Index::                Where you find what you are never looking for

@end menu
@end ifinfo





@ifinfo
@node Disclaimer
@chapter Copyright and other legal stuff
@cindex Copyright
@cindex Distribution
@cindex Permissions
@cindex Prohibitions
@cindex Author
@cindex Adress
@cindex Internet
@cindex Mail
@example
Copyright @copyright{} 1993-1999 Jochen Wiedmann and Marcin Orlowski

            Jochen Wiedmann
            Am Eisteich 9
            72555 Metzingen
            Deutschland


            Since v1.8 program is developed by

            Marcin Orlowski
            ul. Radomska 38
            71-002 Szczecin
            Poland

            carlos@@amiga.com.pl
            http://amiga.com.pl/flexcat/

@end example

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this manual
and the program FlexCat.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file by TeX and print the results,
provided the printed document carries a copying permission notice identical to
this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this paragraph not being
relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

The author gives @strong{absolutely no} warranty that the program described
in this documentation and the results produced by it are correct. The
author cannot be held responsible for @strong{any} damage resulting from
the use of this software.
@end ifinfo


@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node Overview
@chapter Overview
@cindex Overview
Since Workbench 2.1 the Amiga offers a rather pleasant system of using
programs in different languages: The @code{locale.library}. (This is
called localizing, that's what the name's for.)

The idea is simple: You select a language, the english in most cases and
write your program in the same manner as you did without localizing, except
that constant strings are replaced by certain function calls. Another
function call makes it possible that the user selects another language
when the program starts. (The latter function call loads an external file,
the so called @code{catalog} and makes the former to read the strings from
the catalog instead of using the predefined strings.)

These catalogs are independent from the program. All you need to do for
adding another language is to create a new catalog file and this is
possible at any time without changing the program.

But there are additional tasks for the programmer: He needs to create the
catalogs, the predefined strings and some source to handle them all. (The
functions that are mentioned above.) FlexCat is designed to make this in
an easy and nearly automatic manner without losing flexibility especially
in creating the source. An example should make this clear:

Lets assume that we want to write a @file{HelloLocalWorld.c}. Our final
program will look like this:
@example
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <HelloLocalWorld_Cat.h>  /*  You @strong{must} include this! */

    void main(int argc, char *argv[])
    @{
      printf("%s\n", msgHello);
    @}
@end example
@noindent
Note that this is quite the same as the original @file{HelloWorld.c} except
for replacing the string "Hello, world!" with a constant @code{msgHello}.

These constants and the related strings are defined in a so called
@code{Catalog description} file. @xref{Catalog description}. You always
start by creating such a file called @file{HelloLocalWorld.cd}, which could
look like this:
@example
    ;   Comments are allowed, of course! Each line beginning with a
    ;   semicolon is assumed to be a comment
    ;
    ;   The language of the builtin strings:
    #language english
    ;
    ;   The catalog version, used for a call to Locale/OpenCatalog().
    ;   This is different to Exec/OpenLibrary(): 0 means any catalog
    ;   version, other numbers must match exactly!
    #version 0
    ;
    ;   This defines a string and the ID which allows to use it.
    ;   The number 4 says, that this string must not be shorter than
    ;   4 characters.
    msgHello (/4/)
    Hello, world!
@end example

By using FlexCat you create another two files from the catalog description:
The include file @file{HelloLocalWorld_Cat.h} defines the constants and
the @file{HelloLocalWorld_Cat.c} contains an array of strings and some
initializing functions.
You don't need to know what they do, just use them. Especially you don't
need to know anything about the @code{locale.library}!

However, you might be interested, how these files look or even more, you
might want to modify them. This is the difference between FlexCat and other
catalog generators: With FlexCat you are not bound to a certain builtin
format these files have.
Instead it uses external template files, so
called @code{Source descriptions}. This makes it possible, for example,
to allow using catalogs with AmigaDOS 2.0. @xref{Source description}.
If you use the source descriptions from the FlexCat distribution you
can create the source files with the following commands:
@example
    @samp{FlexCat HelloLocalWorld.cd HelloLocalWorld_Cat.c=C_c.sd}
    @samp{FlexCat HelloLocalWorld.cd HelloLocalWorld_Cat.h=C_h.sd}
@end example

When your program is ready, you use FlexCat again to create so called
@code{Catalog translation} files, one for each language you would like to
support. (Except english, which is builtin.) @xref{Catalog translation}.
Lets create a german catalog translation:
@example
    @samp{FlexCat HelloLocalWorld.cd NEWCTFILE Deutsch.ct}
@end example
@noindent
This file would now look as follow:
@example
    ## version
    ## language
    ## codeset 0
    ;   Comments ar eallowed, of course! Each line beginning with a
    ;   semicolon is assumed to be a comment
    ;
    ;   The language of the builtin strings:
    ;
    ;   The catalog version, used for a call to Locale/OpenCatalog().
    ;   This is different to Exec/OpenLibrary(): 0 means any catalog
    ;   version, other numbers must match exactly!
    ;
    ;   This defines a string and the ID which allows to use it.
    ;   The number 4 says, that this string must not be shorter than
    ;   4 characters.
    msgHello

    ;Hello, world!
@end example
@noindent
You see, it looks much like the catalog descriptions. FlexCat includes the
comments from the catalog description, even where it is meaningless: Note
the comment on the string length which shouldn't appear here as these
informations must be in the catalog description only. All you have to do
now is to fill in the informations on the version (a typical version string
like @samp{$VER: Deutsch.catalog 1.2 (06.03.98)} is expected), the language
of the catalog translation (@samp{Deutsch} for german here), the codeset
(which should always be 0 for now, see Locale/OpenCatalog() for details)
and of course the strings itself. FlexCat includes the original strings
as comments, so you always know what to fill in.
Finally you create the catalogs with commands like
@example
    @samp{FlexCat HelloLocalWorld.cd Deutsch.ct CATALOG Deutsch.catalog}
@end example
@noindent
Note, that you don't need the program itself or the source files created
with FlexCat for the catalogs! You can create new catalogs at any time.
It is usual to supply distributions with a file FlexCat.ct, so users
can create own catalogs.

But what happens if you change the program later? Just edit the catalog
description and use FlexCat to update the catalog translations:
@example
    @samp{FlexCat HelloLocalWorld.cd Deutsch.ct NEWCTFILE Deutsch.ct}
@end example
@noindent
All you need to do now is to enter new strings if needed.



@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node Installation
@chapter Installation
@cindex Installation
@cindex Requirements
FlexCat is written in pure Ansi-C (except for the localization), hence it
should run on any Amiga and hopefully on other machines after recompiling.
(The localizing is commented out in that case.) This holds for the created
programs too: FlexCat is written using itself. All distributed source
descriptions should create programs running on any Amiga and even any
machine. (Of course you must ensure that the variable LocaleBase has the
value @samp{NULL} in the latter case.) Localizing, however, is possible
beginning with Workbench 2.1 because the @code{locale.library} isn't
available below.

It is not impossible to offer localizing without the @code{locale.library}:
The source description files @file{C_c_V20.sd} and @file{C_h_V20.sd} give
an example, where the @code{iffparse.library} is used to replace the
@code{locale.library}, if it is not available. This gives Localizing for
Workbench 2.0. @xref{C}.

Installing FlexCat is simple: Just copy the program to a directory in your
search path and select a place for the source descriptions you need.
(These are the files called something like @file{xx_yy.sd}, where @file{xx}
is the programming language.) Probably you want to set the
environment variable @var{FLEXCAT.PREFS} or @var{FLEXCAT_SDDIR}. @xref{Program start}.

If you want to use FlexCat in another language
than the english you need to copy the respective catalog files too.
E.g. for the german language copy the file
@file{Catalogs/Deutsch/FlexCat.catalog} to
@file{Locale:Catalogs/Deutsch/} or to
@file{PROGDIR:Catalogs/Deutsch/} , where
@file{PROGDIR:} is FlexCat's program directory. @xref{Using FlexCat source}.


@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node Program start
@chapter Calling FlexCat from the CLI
@cindex CLI
@cindex Workbench
@cindex Shell
FlexCat is a CLI based program and doesn't operate from the workbench.
It's calling syntax is
@example

FlexCat CDFILE/A,CTFILE,CATALOG/K,NEWCTFILE/K,SOURCES/M,WARNCTGAPS/S,
        NOOPTIM/S,FILL/S,FLUSH/S,NOBEEP/S,NOLANGTOLOWER/S,NOBUFFEREDIO/S,
        MODIFIED/S,QUIET/S,COPYMSGNEW/S,OLDMSGNEW/K

@end example
@noindent

Please note, that due to FlexCat portability, the argument parsing is not
quite standard. Most notably, the only keywords you can (and must) specify
are CATALOG and NEWCTFILE (those of type "/K"), others should be ommited,
or be badly taken as argument itself. This is going to change probably in
the next release.

Since v1.9, FlexCat implements simple preferences mechanism, which allows
you to change default behaviour of FlexCat. @xref{Preferences}.

And now, the arguments meaning:
@table @strong
@cindex CDFILE
@item CDFILE
is the name of a catalog description to be read. This is always needed.
Please note, that the base name of the source description is created from
it making this case significant. @xref{Source description}.

@cindex CTFILE
@item CTFILE
is the name of a catalog translation file to be read. This is needed for
creating catalogs or for updating an old catalog translation file using
the NEWCTFILE argument: FlexCat reads the old file and the catalog
description and creates a new catalog translation file containing the
old strings and possibly some empty lines for new strings.

@cindex CATALOG
@item CATALOG
is the name of a catalog file to be created. This argument requires giving
CTFILE as well.

@cindex NEWCTFILE
@item NEWCTFILE
is the name of a catalog translation file to create. FlexCat reads strings
from CTFILE, if this is given, strings missing in the catalog translation
are replaced by empty lines. (The new catalog translation will contain
only empty lines as strings, if CTFILE is omitted.)

@cindex SOURCES
@item SOURCES
are the names of source files to be created. These should be given in the
form @samp{source=template} where @file{source} is the file to create and
@samp{template} is the name of a source description file to be scanned.

If the source description isn't found, FlexCat tries to open a file with
the same name in the directory @file{PROGDIR:lib}. (The subdirectory
@file{lib} of the directory where the binary FlexCat itself lives.)
You can overwrite this default with the environment variable
@var{FLEXCAT_SDDIR}. Example:
@example
    @samp{FlexCat FlexCat.cd FlexCat_Cat.c=Templates/C_c_V20.sd}
@end example
@noindent
would look for a file @file{Templates/C_c_V20.sd} in the current
directory first. If this wouldn't be found and no variable
@var{FLEXCAT_SDDIR} would be present, FlexCat would look for
@file{PROGDIR:lib/Templates/C_c_V20.sd}. But if @var{FLEXCAT_SDDIR}
would exist and have the value @samp{Work:Flexcat}, for example,
then the existence of @file{Work:FlexCat/Templates/C_c_V20.sd}
would be checked.

@cindex WARNCTGAPS
@item WARNCTGAPS
usually FlexCat doesn't warn about symbols missing in the
catalog translation. This option will switch on such warnings.

@cindex NOOPTIM
@item NOOPTIM
Normally, if both strings (source in #?.cd file and translation in #?.ct
one) are equall, FlexCat assumes there's no need to write it to the catalog
file as it should be in program built-in string table already, from which
it will be taken.  But if you want, for some reasons these strings to be
written (or in another words:  if you want all strings to be written) use
NOOPTIM.

@cindex FILL
@item FILL
This feature is highly useful for the translators.  Normally, while working
on the translation you got some strings still empty as you are working on
them.  But it obvious you want to check currently translated strings.
Unfortunately all catalog creators including FlexCat write all empty
strings too, which cause empty buttons or simmilar things to happen.
Switch to forbid empty strings is not a good solution because prevents you
from having such if you need.  Also some bad written program may requre all
strings to be in the catalog (even empty) e.g.  due to lack of built-in
strings.  Using FILL option you force FlexCat to write source string (from
@file{#?.cd} file) everytime it catch translation to be empty or be not present at
all.  NOTE:  this is only for testing purposes.  Final catalogs should
always be created with no FILL swich used!

@cindex FLUSH
@item FLUSH
This switch is useful when you are translate and test your translation
simultanously. As AmigaOS caches catalogs (as well as libraries, fonts, devices
etc) in memory, you need to flush it (e.g. using @file{C:AVAIL FLUSH} command) every
time you want new catalog to be reread from the disk (instead of using
cached copy). If you specify this switch while creating the catalog,
FlexCat will automatically flush all unused things from the memory. NOTE:
FLUSH works only when you create new catalog. Otherwise it will be ignored.
Example:
@example
    @samp{FlexCat Test.cd Test.ct CATALOG Test.catalog FLUSH}
@end example

@cindex NOBEEP
@item NOBEEP
Since version 1.9, FlexCat will do DisplayBeep() to notice you about the problems
it encountered. Such behaviour is very useful when you call FlexCat from
environment without standard output (e.g. you launch the script form the
DOpus or other tool, etc). Of course you may don't like these beeps
(however FlexCat is smart enough and beep only once, even you receive
20 warrnings, so don't be afraid of any beep-bombing). In such case use
NOBEEP switch to shut FlexCat up.

@cindex NOLANGTOLOWER
@item NOLANGTOLOWER
Normally, FlexCat makes #language entry argument (from #?.ct file) lowercased
using utility.library call. Utility library calls locale.library if present,
but I was reported that due to broken conversion table in some locales
(czech for instance), it leads to incorrect strings. So this switch is the
workaround for that problem. I strongly suggest to force your locale author
to fix that bug, as some tools may also give you wrong results. And
rememeber to keep #language name lowercased manually, if you need to use
that switch (but don't use it unless really necessary).

@cindex NOBUFFEREDIO
@item NOBUFFEREDIO
Buffered IO makes running faster the most applications that often do I/O.
So does FlexCat 2.0+. The speed up is mostly noticeable on systems using
pooling devices (like (E)IDE), but the gain will also be reached on DMA
bases systems (SCSI). FlexCat uses two 2KB buffers, so if you really
think that's not the feature you like, that's the way to disable it.

@cindex MODIFIED
@item MODIFIED
This option tells FlexCat to compile the catalog only then, when the source
#?.cd or #?.ct file were changed since last catalog creation. When catalog
file is older than its sources, FlexCat just quits. This option is very
useful when you want to create kind of shell scripts to process and compile
more catalogs at once (e.g. for OS localisation or programs like DOpus5),
and don't want to waste your time for recompilation of nonmodified catalogs.

@example
    @samp{FlexCat File.cd File.ct CATALOG File.catalog MODIFIED}
@end example

@cindex QUIET
@item QUIET
Tells FlexCat to keep its mouth shut unless really necessary.  It means that
you won't see any warning messages.  Errors will be reported.

@example
    @samp{FlexCat File.cd File.ct QUIET}
@end example

@cindex COPYMSGNEW
@item COPYMSGNEW
While updating catalog translation file with new #?.cd file, FlexCat
usually marks newly added strings with @var{***NEW***} string (see the
Preferences related chapter to find out how to customize this string),
which is very useful and lets you easily catch all the new things that
had appeared since last release. Unfortunately, previous versions of
FlexCat (pre 2.2) didn't copy those markers from old #?.ct to updated
one, which forced user to either update only completely translated #?.ct
files which didn't recuire them any longer, or to keep them by hand in
any way. This was quite annoing, so v2.2 comes with the solution for
that problem - FlexCat is now aware of presence of such markers
and when this option is turned on, it simply copies them form old #?.ct
to updated one.

@example
    @samp{FlexCat New.cd Old.ct NEWCTFILE Updated.ct COPYMSGNEW}
@end example

By default, COPYMSGNEW searches for @var{***NEW***} string and treats
it as new string marker. But if you were using something different
than default string, you need to specify it using OLDNEWMSG, otherwise
FlexCat won't catch them:

@example
    @samp{FlexCat New.cd Old.ct NEWCTFILE Updated.ct COPYMSGNEW OLDMSGNEW=**Neu**}
@end example

@cindex OLDNEWMSG
@item OLDNEWMSG
This option needs to be used together with COPYMSGNEW to take effect.
By default, COPYMSGNEW searches for @var{***NEW***} string and treats
it as new string marker. But if you were using something different
than default string, you need to specify it using OLDNEWMSG, otherwise
FlexCat won't catch them:

@example
    @samp{FlexCat New.cd Old.ct NEWCTFILE Updated.ct COPYMSGNEW OLDMSGNEW=**Neu**}
@end example

@cindex NOSPACE
@item NOSPACE
When the #?.ct file is created by FlexCat, the original string is
always placed as the comment, which is a must-have reference
for doing further translation. By default, FlexCat writes those
in the following way:

@example
    @samp{; this_is_original_string}
@end example

As some people does not like that extra space between ';' and the
text itself, using NOSPACE switch may appear the cure. When this
option is specified (either in command line or in prefs file),
your comments will look like the one below:

@example
    @samp{;this_is_original_string}
@end example

@end table

For further examples of command lines see @ref{Overview}.


@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node Preferences
@chapter Changing default behaviour of FlexCat
@cindex Preferences
@cindex flexcat.prefs

Since version 1.9 FlexCat implements simple preference mechanism.
By using environmental variable @var{FLEXCAT.PREFS} you can change
program's default behaviour.

Variable @var{FLEXCAT.PREFS} is parsed using dos.library ReadArgs()
call, thus all switches should be typed in one line with space
as switch separator. The preferences template looks as follow:
@example

SDDIR/K,NEW_MSG/K,WARNCTGAPS/S,NOOPTIM/S,FILL/S,FLUSH/S,NOBEEP/S,QUIET/S,
COPYMSGNEW/S,OLDMSGNEW/K/,NOSPACE/S

@end example

@table @strong
@cindex NEW_MSG
@item NEW_MSG
can be used to customize the text, FlexCat uses to mark new strings
apparing while updating the catalog translation file (using new description
file and old translation). The default string is @var{***NEW***}.

For detailed information about other tags, please read the @ref{Program start}
chapter.

Note concerning SDDIR: while creating source file FlexCat firstly check
the current dir, then directory set in preferences. If it still fails,
it read @var{FLEXCAT_SDDIR} variable and finally the @file{"PROGDIR:lib/"}
drawer. So using both preferences variable and @var{FLEXCAT_SDDIR} you
can use two custom descriptors' drawers simultaneously.

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex
@end table

@node Catalog description
@chapter Catalog description files
@cindex Catalog description
@cindex .cd
A catalog description file contains four kinds of lines.

@table @strong
@item Comment lines
Any line beginning with a semicolon is assumed to be a comment line,
hence ignored. (The string lines below are an exception. These may begin
with a semicolon.)

@item Command lines
Any line beginning with a '#' (with the same exception as above) are
assumed to be command lines. Possible commands are:
@table @code
@item #language <str>
gives the programs default language, the language of the strings in the
catalog description. Default is @samp{#language english}.
@item #version <num>
gives the version number of catalogs to be opened. Note that this number
must match exact and not be same or higher as in @cite{Exec/OpenLibrary}.
An exception is the number 0, which accepts any catalog. Default is
@samp{#version 0}. See @code{Locale/OpenCatalog} for further information
on catalog language and version.
@item #lengthbytes <num>
Instructs FlexCat to put the given number of bytes before a string containing
its length. The length is the number of bytes in the string without length
bytes and a trailing @samp{NUL} byte. (Catalog files and hence catalog
strings will have a trailing @samp{NUL} byte. This is not always true for
the default strings, depending on the source description file.)
@samp{<num>} must be between 0 and sizeof(long)=4, Default is
@samp{#lengthbytes 0}.
@item #basename <str>
Sets the basename of the source description. @xref{Source description}.
This overwrites the basename from the command line argument CDFILE.
@xref{Program start}.
@end table
Commands are case insensitive.
@item Description lines
declare a string. They look like @samp{IDSTR (id/minlen/maxlen)} where
@samp{IDSTR} is a identifier (a string consisting of the characters
a-z,A-Z and 0-9), @samp{id} is a unique number (from now on called ID),
@samp{minlen} and @samp{maxlen}
are the strings minimum and maximum length, respectively. The latter three
may be missing (but not the characters @samp{(//)}!) in which case FlexCat
chooses a number and makes no restrictions on the string length.
Better don't use the ID's, if you don't need. The lines following are the
@item String lines
@cindex Control characters
@cindex Ascii-Code
containing the string itself and nothing else. These may contain certain
control characters beginning with a backslash:
@table @samp
@item \b
Backspace (Ascii 8)
@item \c
Control Sequence Introducer (Ascii 155)
@item \e
Escape (Ascii 27)
@item \f
Form Feed (Ascii 12)
@item \g
Display beep (Ascii 7)
@item \n
Line Feed, newline (Ascii 10)
@item \r
Carriage Return (Ascii 13)
@item \t
Tab (Ascii 9)
@item \v
Vertical tab (Ascii 11)
@item \)
The trailing bracket which is possibly needed as part of a @samp{(..)}
sequence, see @ref{Source description}.
@item \\
The backslash itself
@item \xHH
The character given by the ascii code @samp{HH}, where @samp{HH} are hex
digits.
@item \OOO
The character given by the ascii code @samp{OOO}, where @samp{OOO} are octal
digits.
@end table
Finally a single backslash at the end of the line causes concatening the
following line. This makes it possible to use strings of any length, FlexCat
makes no assumptions on string length.
@end table

A string is hence given by a description line and the following string line.
Let's see an example:
@example
    msgHello (/4/)
    Hello, this is english!\n
@end example
@noindent
@cindex FlexCat.cd
The ID is missing here, so FlexCat chooses a suitable number. The number 4
instructs FlexCat, that the following string must not have less than four
characters and it may be of any length. See the file @file{FlexCat.cd} for
a further example.



@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node Catalog translation
@chapter Catalog translation files
@cindex Catalog translation
@cindex .ct
Catalog translation files are very similar to catalog descriptions, except
for other commands and having no informations on string ID and length.
(These are taken from the catalog description.) Any string from the
catalog description must be present (However, FlexCat omits writing
strings into the catalog which are identical to the default string.)
and no additional identifiers may occur. This is easy assured by using
FlexCat to create new catalog translation files. @xref{Overview}.

The commands allowed in catalog translations are:
@table @code
@item ##version <str>
Gives the catalog version as AmigaDOS version string. Example:
@example
    @samp{##version $VER: FlexCat.ct 8.3 (06.03.98)}
@end example
The version number of this catalog is 8. Hence the catalog descriptions
version number must be 0 or 8.

You may replace the date string @samp{27.09.93} with special keyword
@samp{$TODAY}.  While creating catalog, @samp{$TODAY} will be replaced by current
date (note, only 1st occurance of @samp{$TODAY} in @samp{$VER} string will be processed).
If you want your version strings to always be recent type i.e.:
@example
    @samp{$VER: FlexCat.ct 2.2 ($TODAY)}
@end example

Please note, that from FlexCat 2.6 on, the date is automatically updated.
This way the you know, if the compiled catalog is up-to-date in relation
to a catalog translation.
Furthermore you can now have a correct version string in the .ct file,
denoting that is is a .ct file. FlexCat automatically turns the ".ct"
into  ".catalog" when creating the catalog file.

@item ##rcsid $Date$ $Revision$ $Id$
can be used in conjunction with a revision control system instead
of ##version. @samp{<date>} is the date in the form @samp{yy/mm/dd},
@samp{time} is the time (ignored), @samp{<rev>} the revision and
@samp{<name>} the name to be used in the version string.

@item ##name <name>
is present for CatComp compatibility only. It replaces the
@samp{<name>} argument in the @code{##rcsid} command.

@item ##language <str>
The catalogs language. Of course this should be another language than the
catalog descriptions language. The @samp{##language} and @samp{##version}
commands must be present in a catalog translation.
@item ##codeset <num>
Currently not used, must be 0. This is the default value.
@item ## chunk <ID> <string>
Adds a chunk ID to the catalog which consists if the given <string>.
Usually one uses this to add comments to the catalog.
@example
    ## chunk AUTH German catalog translation by Jochen Wiedmann
@end example
@end table

@cindex Deutsch.ct
The string from above looks like this in the catalog translation:
@example
    msgHello
    Hallo, dies ist deutsch!\n
@end example
@noindent
See @file{Deutsch.ct} as further example of a catalog translation.



@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node Source description
@chapter Source description files
@cindex Source description
@cindex .sd
This is the special part of FlexCat. Until now there is nothing that
CatComp, KitCat and others don't offer too. The created source should make
it easy, to use the catalogs without losing flexibility. Any programming
language should be possible and any requirements should be satisfyable.
This seems like a contradiction, but FlexCat's solution are the source
description files containing a template of the source to be created. These
are editable as the catalog description and translation files are,
hence FlexCat can create any code.

The source descriptions are searched for certain symbols which are replaced
by certain values. Possible symbols are the backslash characters from
above and additionally sequences beginning with a @samp{%}. (This is well
known for C programmers.)
@table @samp
@item %b
is the base name of the catalog description. @xref{Program start}.
@item %v
is the version number of the catalog description. Don't mix this up with
the catalog version string from the catalog translation.
@item %l
is the catalog descriptions language. Please note, that this is inserted
as a string. See @samp{%s} below.
below.
@item %n
is the number of strings in the catalog description.
@item %%
is the character @samp{%} itself.
@end table

But the most important thing are the following seqences. These represent
the catalog strings in different ways. Lines containing one or more of these
symbols are repeated for any String.

@table @samp

@item %i
is the identifier from the catalog description.

@item %nd
@itemx %nx
@itemx %nc
is the strings ID in decimal, hexadecimal or octal characters, respectively.
The number @samp{n} tells FlexCat, how many characters the ID should use
(the string will be filled with Zeros at the left). You may omit @samp{n}:
In this case the ID will take just the number of characters it needs.

@item %e
is the number of this string. Counting begins with 0.

@item %s
is the string itself; this will be inserted in a way depending on the
programming language and can be controlled using the commands
@samp{##stringtype} and @samp{##shortstrings}.

@item %na
is the string's ID. The difference between @samp{%na} and e.g. @samp{%nx} is that
the @samp{%na} produces string's ID @strong{parted} to single bytes:
@example
  @samp{%2a} in source descriptor will produce @samp{\x00\0x20}
@end example
You may omit @samp{n}. In this case the ID will take 4 bytes.

@item %nt
is the string's len. Please note, that the result value is always @strong{even}.

@item %z
this item should be used together with @samp{%nt}. Because @samp{%nt} always returns
even value having desriptor line like:
@example 
static const char Block[] =
@{
     "%2a" "%2t" %s "%z"
@};
@end example
may lead to problems, especially while parsing such table, because @samp{%2t}
might be even while real string's @samp{%s} lenght may be odd! So while parsing
you read or skip one byte too much (I guess consequences are known). To avoid
such problems @samp{%z} was introduced. FlexCat replaces it with as many bytes
(@samp{\x00}) as many string's lenght lacks to even. So if string is 3 bytes
long @samp{%nt} returns @samp{4} and @samp{%z} adds one @samp{\x00}

@item %(...)
inserts the text between the brackets for any string except the last.
This is probably needed in Arrays, if the array entries should be separated
by commas, but the last entry must not be followed by a comma. You can
use @samp{%(,)} in that case. Note that within the brackets there is no
replacing of @samp{%} sequences. Backslash sequences, however, are still
allowed.

@end table

The control sequences @samp{%l} and @samp{%s} create strings. But how strings
look depends on the program language. That's why the source description
allows command lines similar to the catalog translation. These must begin
with the first character of the line and any command must have its own line.
Possible commands are:
@table @code
@item ##shortstrings
makes longer strings to be splitted on different lines. This is probably
not always possible or not implemented into FlexCat and hence the default
is to create one, probably very long string.
@item ##stringtype <type>
Tells FlexCat how strings should look like. Possible types are
@table @strong
@item None
No additional characters are created. An image of the string is inserted
and nothing else. No output of binary characters (the backslash sequences)
is possible.
@item C
creates strings according to C. The strings are preceded and followed by
the character @samp{"}. Strings are splitted using the sequences
@samp{"\} at the end of the line and @samp{"} at the beginning of the
new line. (The backslash is needed in macros.) Binary characters are
inserted using @samp{\OOO}. @xref{C}.
@item Oberon
is like string type C, except for the trailing backslash at the end of the
line. @xref{Oberon}. This string type is recommended for Modula-2, too.
@item Assembler
Strings are created using @samp{dc.b}. Readable ascii characters are preceded
and followed by the character @samp{'}, binary characters are inserted as
@samp{$XX}. @xref{Assembler}.
@item E
Strings are preceded and followed by the character @samp{'}. A @samp{+}
concatenates strings which are spread on different lines. Binary characters
are inserted like in C.
@end table
@end table

Let's look at an excerpt from the file @file{C_h.sd} creating an include
file for the programming language C.
@example
##stringtype C
##shortstrings

#ifndef %b_CAT_H    /*  Assure that this is read only once. */
#define %b_CAT_H


/*  Get other include files     */
#include <exec/types.h>
#include <libraries/locale.h>


/*  Prototypes  */
extern void Open%bCatalog(struct Locale *, STRPTR);
extern void Close%bCatalog(void);
extern STRPTR Get%bString(LONG);

/*  Definitions of the identifiers and their ID's           */
/*  This line will be repeated for any string.              */
#define %i %d

#endif
@end example

For the search path that is used for source descriptions see
@xref{Program start}.




@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node Using FlexCat source
@chapter Including FlexCat source in own programs
@cindex Using FlexCat source
@cindex FlexCat source
Of course this depends on what source is created and hence on the
source description. What we are talking here about are the source description
files distributed with FlexCat. @xref{Source description}.

All source descriptions should allow using the program without
@code{locale.library}. However, a global variable called @samp{LocaleBase}
(@samp{_LocaleBase} for assembler) must be present and initialized with
NULL or by a call to @cite{Exec/OpenLibrary}. No localizing is possible in
the former case except when using the source description @file{C_c_V20.sd}.
This allows localizing on 2.0 by repacing the @code{locale.library} with the
@code{iffparse.library}. (A variable @samp{IFFParseBase} has to be present
for this and initialized like @samp{LocaleBase}.) @xref{C}.
The programmer does not need knowledge of these libraries except when
creating own source descriptions.

There are three functions and calling them is rather simple.
@deffn {} OpenCatalog (locale, language)
This function possibly opens a catalog. The argument @code{locale} is a
pointer to a Locale structure amd @code{language} is a string containing
the name of the language that should be opened. In most cases these should
both be @samp{NULL} or @samp{NIL}, respectively, because the user's defaults
are overwritten otherwise. See @cite{Locale.OpenCatalog} for details.

Non object oriented languages (C, Assembler, Modula) usually call these
function @code{OpenXXXCatalog}, where XXX is the base name of the application:
This allows to use different catalogs in the same program.

If the user has @samp{Deutsch} and @samp{Français} as default languages
and the programs base name is @samp{XXX} this looks for the following files:
@example
    @file{PROGDIR:Catalogs/Deutsch/XXX.catalog}
    @file{LOCALE:Catalogs/Deutsch/XXX.catalog}
    @file{PROGDIR:Catalogs/Français/XXX.catalog}
    @file{LOCALE:Catalogs/Français/XXX.catalog}
@end example
@noindent
where @file{PROGDIR:} is the programs current directory. (The order of
@file{PROGDIR:} and @file{LOCALE:} can get changed in order to suppress a
requester like @samp{Insert volume YYY}.

OpenCatalog is of type void (a procedure for Pascal programmers) and hence
gives no result.
@end deffn

@deffn {} GetString (ID)
Gives a pointer to the string with the given ID from the catalog description.
Of course these strings are owned by @code{locale.library} and must not be
modified.

An example might be useful. Take the string from the catalog description
example, which was called @code{msgHello}. The source descriptions
declare a constant @samp{msgHello} representing the ID. This could be
printed in C using
@example
    printf("%s\n", GetString(msgHello));
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn {} CloseCatalog (void)
This function frees the catalog (that is the allocated RAM) before
terminating the program. You can call this function at any time even before
OpenCatalog is called.
@end deffn

@menu
* C::         FlexCat source in C programs
* C++::       FlexCat source in C++ programs
* Oberon::    FlexCat source in Oberon programs
* Modula-2::  FlexCat source in Modula-2 programs
* Assembler:: FlexCat source in Assembler programs
* E::         FlexCat source in E programs
* Appendix::  Multiple catalogs support
@end menu



@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node C
@section FlexCat source in C programs
@cindex C
@cindex C_c_V20.sd
@cindex C_h.sd
@cindex C_c_V21.sd
@cindex AutoC_c.sd
@cindex AutoC_h.sd
@cindex CatComp_h.sd
@cindex Cat2h_c.sd
@cindex Cat2h_h.sd
C source consists of two parts: A @file{.c} file which should be compiled
and linked without further notice and an include file which should be
included from any source part using catalog strings and which defines the
ID's as macros.

The C compilers I know (SAS/C, Dice and gcc) allow automatic opening of
libraries and initialization of the catalogs: Thus you need not call
the functions @code{OpenCatalog} and @code{CloseCatalog}, your compiler
does this for you. Similarly it calls the @code{GetString} functions
for all catalog strings from within @code{Opencatalog}. This allows to
simply write @samp{msgHello} instead of @samp{GetString(msgHello)}.

If you define a preprocessor symbol @code{LOCALIZE_V20} to the compiler
(option @samp{-D LOCALIZE_V20} with gcc and Dice, @samp{DEF LOCALIZE_V20}
with SAS/C), you get a program which can use catalogs under OS 2.0:
The @code{locale.library} is replaced by the @code{iffparse.library}
in that case. Your program needs an option like @samp{LANGUAGE Deutsch}
in that case: I function @code{InitXXXCatalog} (@samp{XXX} being the
base name of the application) should be called, if this
option is present, which receives the language name as argument.
This option is ignored, of course, if you have the @code{locale.library}.
(It would be possible to do similar things under OS 1.3, but I don't
want to support this obsolete version anymore.)

You loose a little bit functionality with this source description: For
example, you cannot supply a @code{Locale} structure to
@code{OpenCatalog}. However, 95% of all applications won't miss anything,
others need to modify the source description.

For an example of a program using these source descriptions see
@ref{Overview}.

@samp{NOTE:}

Since v1.9, distribution archive contains @file{CatComp_h.sd} source
descriptor, which can be used with programs utilizing more than
one catalog at the same time. Look inside to see how to update
other source descriptors.

There're also another new source descriptor by Magnus Holmgren <lear@@algonet.se>.
The files @file{Cat2h_c.sd} and @file{Cat2h_h.sd} contains source descriptors that
generates code similar to the one generated by Cat2h by Nico François (and
also Cat2Inc by Magnus Holmgren ;). It uses a somewhat different approach
to string handling, that is small and fast.

Rather than storing all string in an array, and scan that one each time
(like CatComp normally does; there are ways around that though), the first
two bytes of a string contains the ID. The "GetString" function, which
takes a string as argument, then only reads these two bytes into a long
word, and the string ID and default string is then known.

As of version 1.9, FlexCat is capable of generating that kind of output,
using the %a command. The included files actually use %2a, and thus, only
two ID bytes per string are generated (like Cat2h does). This should be
enough for most applications. If you change the length, remember that the
GetString() function need to be changed accordingly.

The generated header file defines all strings, and the source file contains
code to open/close the catalog (with autoinit code for SAS/C and DICE), and
a suitable GetString function.  A quick look at the generated code should
be enough to gather all the details, I think.

The code does currently not support multiple catalogs, nor change of
version number and builtin language.  Easy to add though (e.g.  by using %b
for all names (and references) needed to be unique e.g.  Get%bString()
etc), should the need arise.

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node C++
@section FlexCat source in C++ programs
@cindex C++
@cindex C++_cc.sd
@cindex C++_h.sd
@cindex C++_CatalogF.cc
@cindex C++_CatalogF.h
Using FlexCat source in C++ programs is extremely comfortable: Almost
everything is done by a special class implemented in the files
@file{C++_CatalogF.cc} and @file{C++_CatalogF.h}. All you have to do is to
rename these files into @file{CatalogF.cc} and @file{CatalogF.h},
compile them and create and compile two additional files using the
source descriptions @file{C++_cc.sd} and @file{C++_h.sd}.
The former will create a file with the strings (which must be compiled
too, of course) and the latter will be included into your own program.
A C++ program which uses FlexCat source will look like this:
@example
    #include <iostream.h>
    extern "C"
    @{
    #include <clib/exec_protos.h>
    @}
    #include "CatalogF.h"
    #include "HelloLocalWorld_Cat.h"

    struct LocaleBase *LocaleBase = 0;

    int main()
    @{ //  You must open the library here, even if your compiler supports
      //  Auto-Opening: This will usually break if the locale.library
      //  is not present. This is not what we want here as we just use
      //  the builtin strings in that case.
      LocaleBase = (struct LocaleBase *) OpenLibrary("locale.library", 38);

      const CatalogF cat(0, 0, HelloLocalWorld_ARGS);

      cout >> cat.GetString(msgHelloLocalWorld);

      if (LocaleBase)
          CloseLibrary(LocaleBase);
    @}
@end example
A modification of gcc's @file{libauto.a} is available which will even allow
to remove the lines concerning the variable @code{LocaleBase}.



@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node Oberon
@section FlexCat source in Oberon programs
@cindex Oberon
@cindex Oberon_V38.sd
@cindex Oberon_V39.sd
@cindex AmigaOberon
@cindex Oberon-A
There are different source descriptions: @file{AmigaOberon.sd} is designed
for the current version of the @code{AmigaOberon} compiler,
@file{Oberon_V39.sd} is for older versions and @file{Oberon_V38.sd}
uses the @file{Locale.mod} from Hartmut Goebel. @file{Oberon-A.sd} is,
of course for @code{Oberon-A}.

The function prototypes are
@example
    XXX.OpenCatalog(loc: Locale.LocalePtr; language : ARRAY OF CHAR);
    XXX.GetString(num: LONGINT): Exec.StrPtr;
    XXX.CloseCatalog();
@end example
@noindent
where @samp{XXX} is the basename from the source description.
@xref{Source description}.

Finally an example using FlexCat source:
@example
    MODULE HelloLocalWorld;

    IMPORT  x:=HelloLocalWorld_Cat; Dos;

    BEGIN
      x.OpenCatalog(NIL, "");

      Dos.PrintF("%s\n", x.GetString(x.msgHello));

      (* Catalog will be closed automatically       *)
      (* when program exits.                        *)
    END Anything;
@end example


@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node Modula-2
@section Flexcat source in Modula-2 programs
@cindex Modula-2
@cindex Modula2Def.sd
@cindex Modula2Mod.sd
Modula-2 supports a module concept similar to Oberon. This means
that the function names are always the same. Unlike Oberon, however,
Modula-2 needs an implementation and a definition module, that's
why you have to create two files using the source descriptions
@file{Modula2Def.sd} and @file{Modula2Mod.sd}. These are adapted for
the M2Amiga compiler. Note, that you need the file
@file{OptLocaleL.def} from version 4.3 of the M2Amiga compiler, too.

The function prototypes are:
@example
    PROCEDURE OpenCatalog(loc : ld.LocalePtr;
                          language : ARRAY OF CHAR);
    PROCEDURE CloseCatalog();
    PROCEDURE GetString(num : LONGINT) : ld.StrPtr;
@end example
@noindent
where @samp{XXX} is the base name from the source description.
@xref{Source description}.

Finally an example of a program using FlexCat source:
@example
    MODULE HelloLocalWorld;

    IMPORT hl: HelloLocalWorldLocale,
           io: InOut;

    BEGIN
      hl.OpenCatalog(NIL, "");

      io.WriteString(hl.GetString(hl.msgHello)); io.WriteLn;

      hl.CloseCatalog;
    END HelloLocalWorld.
@end example


@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node Assembler
@section FlexCat source in Assembler programs
@cindex Assembler
@cindex AztecAs_asm.sd
@cindex AztecAs_i.sd
Assembler source is created for usage with the Aztec Assembler.  This should
not be very different to other assemblers and you should be able to
implement own source descriptions. The source consists of two parts:
A @file{.asm} file which should be assembled and linked without further
notice and an @file{.i} include file which defines the string ID's and must
be included by the using program.

The FlexCat-function names are slightly modified to allow the usage of
different catalogs in one file: These are
@samp{OpenXXXCatalog}, @samp{CloseXXXCatalog} and @samp{GetXXXString}, where
@samp{XXX} is the base name from the source description. The concept is
copied from the GadToolsBox and prooved good, as I think. @xref{Source
description}.

As usual the function result is given in d0 and the functions save registers
d2-d7 and a2-a7. OpenCatalog expects its arguments in a0 (pointer to
Locale structure) and a1 (Pointer to language string) which should be NULL
in most cases. GetString expects a pointer in a0. You should not care about
what it points to.

Finally an example of a program using FLexCat source:
@example
*   HelloLocalWorld.asm
        include "XXX.i" ; Opening this is a must. This
                        ; contains "xref OpenHelloLocalWorldCatalog", ...

        xref    _LVOOpenLibrary
        xref    _LVOCloseLibrary
        xref    _AbsExecBase

        dseg
LocNam: dc.b    "locale.library",0
        dc.l    _LocaleBase,4       ; Must be present under this name

        cseg

main:   move.l  #38,d0              ; Open locale.library
        lea     LocName,a1
        move.l  _AbsExecBase.a6
        jsr     _LVOOpenLibrary(a6)
*   NO exit, if OpenLibrary fails

        sub.l   a0,a0               ; Open catalog
        sub.l   a1,a1
        jsr     OpenHelloLocalWorldCatalog

        lea.l   msgHello,a0         ; Get pointer to string
        jsr     GetHelloLocalWorldString
        jsr     PrintD0             ; and print it

Ende:
        jsr     CloseHelloLocalWorldCatalog ; Close Catalog
        move.l  _LocaleBase,a1      ; Close locale.library
        move.l  a1,d0               ; this test is a must for 1.3
        beq     Ende1
        jsr     CloseLibrary
Ende1:
        rts
        end
@end example




@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node E
@section FlexCat source in E programs
@cindex E
@cindex E21b.sd
@cindex E30b.sd
Since version 3.0 E allows to split a programs in separate modules. The
following describes the usage of @file{E30b.sd} which works with E3.0b or
later. (Version 3.0a had significant bugs, previous versions might use
@file{E21b.sd} which needs inserting the created source into the own
source manually.)

@file{E30b.sd} creates a module called @file{Locale} which contains a
variable @code{cat} of type @samp{catalog_XXX}, where @samp{XXX} is the
basename from the source description. @xref{Source description}.
A file @file{HelloLocalWorld.e} might look like this:
@example
    MODULE '*Locale'
        -> Use this module

    DEF cat : PTR TO catalog_HelloLocalWorld
        -> This variable contains all the catalog strings and some
        -> methods. You must declare it in any module using
        -> Localization, but initialize it in the main module only.

    PROC main()

        localebase := OpenLibrary('locale.library', 0)
            -> Open locale.library; @strong{No} exit, if it cannot
            -> be opened: We use the builtin strings in that case.

        NEW cat.create()
        cat.open()
            -> As already mentioned, this is needed in the main
            -> module only.

        WriteF('\s\n', cat.msg_Hello_world.getstr())
            -> cat.msg_Hello_world one of the strings contained in
            -> cat. This string declares a method getstr() which
            -> reads the catalog and returns a pointer to the
            -> localized string.

        cat.close()
        IF localebase THEN CloseLibrary(localebase)
    ENDPROC
@end example



@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node Appendix
@section Multiple catalogs support

Most of currently available source descriptors cannot be used
for programs opening more than one catalog. In later releases
it will surely change, and corrected source desriptors will
be part of the release.

For now I supply the example of such source descriptor file.
Read @samp{CatComp_h.sd} to see how should the descriptor be
defined to avoid multiple symols etc. In few words: use
@samp{%b} as prefix, suffix or other part of any name that
is the vital part of source. If you table of strings is
named @samp{STRING} replace this by @samp{%b_STRINGS} and
you won't get dublicated lables any longer.

@samp{CatComp_h.sd} produces source file similar to CatComp's
used to generate, and can be used by those people who wish to
use FlexCat but don't want to significantly change all of own
programs.

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node Future
@unnumbered Further development of FlexCat
@cindex Future
@cindex FlexCat
@cindex Contributions
However FlexCat seems to be almost finished, I got few items on my TODO
list yet.  And of course I'm open for suggestions, tips or critics.
Especially I offer to include new string types because this is possible
with very minor changes.

I would be pleased, if someone would send me new source descriptions and
I could introduce them into further distributions. Any programming language,
any extensions, provided that they are prooved good by testing the source in
a real existing program. See @xref{Support}, for contact addresses.

@node Support
@unnumbered FlexCat support sites
@cindex Support

For software updates visit FlexCat's home page at:
@example
http://amiga.com.pl/flexcat/
@end example

If you got any suggestion, bug report please e-mail me at:


@example
carlos@@amiga.com.pl
@end example

or via snail mail:

@example
Marcin Orlowski
ul. Radomska 38
71-002 Szczecin
Poland
@end example

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex


@node Credits
@unnumbered Credits
@cindex Credits

@samp{Jochen Wiedmann's thanks go to:}

@table @strong
@item Albert Weinert
for KitCat, the predecessor of FlexCat which has done me valuable things,
but finally wasn't flexible enough, and for the Oberon source descriptions.

@item Reinhard Spisser und Sebastiano Vigna
for the Amiga version of texinfo. This documentation is written using it.

@item The Free Software Foundation
for the original version of texinfo and many other excellent software.

@item Matt Dillon
for DICE and especially for DME.

@item Alessandro Galassi
for the italian catalog.

@item Lionel Vintenat
for the E source description and its documentation, the french catalogs
and bug reports.

@item Antonio Joaquín Gomez Gonzalez (u0868551@@oboe.etsiig.uniovi.es) for
the C++ source descripton, the spanish translation of the manual, the
spanish catalog and the very good hint on speeding up the GetString
function.

@item Olaf Peters (op@@hb2.maus.de) for the Modula-2 source description

@item Russ Steffen (steffen@@uwstout.edu)
for the suggestion of the FLEXCAT_SDDIR variable.

@item Lauri Aalto (kilroy@@tolsun.oulu.fi)
for the finnish catalogs.

@item Marcin Orlowski (carlos@@amiga.com.pl)
for the polish catalogs and for maintaining the polish locale package.

@item Udo Schuermann (walrus@@wam.umd.edu)
for suggesting the WARNCTGAPS option and the ##chunk command.

@item Christian Hoj (cbh@@vision.auc.dk)
für die dänische Quelltextbeschreibung

@item The people of #AmigaGer
for answering many stupid questions and lots of fun, for example
stefanb (Stefan Becker), PowerStat (Kai Hoffmann), \
ill (Markus Illenseer), Quarvon (Jürgen Lang), ZZA (Bernhard Möllemann),
Tron (Mathias Scheler), mungo (Ignatios Souvlatzis), \
jow (Jürgen Weinelt) und Stargazer (Petra Zeidler).

@item Commodore
for the Amiga and Kickstart 2.0. Keep on developing it and I'll be an
Amiga-user for the next 8 years too. ;-)
@end table



@samp{Marcin's thanks go to:}

@table @strong

@item Jochen Wiedmann for creating FlexCat

@item Magnus Holmgren <lear@@algonet.se> for additional source descriptor Cat2h

@item Members of @strong{Amiga Translators' Organization} <http://ato.vapor.com/ato/>
     for creating additional translations and updating existing ones:

@table @strong
     @item Serbian catalog file by Ljubomir Jankovic <lurch@@afrodita.rcub.bg.ac.yu>

     @item Czech translation by Vit Sindlar <xsindl00@@stud.fee.vutbr.cz>

     @item Svedish translation by Magnus Holmgren <lear@@algonet.se> and Hjalmar Wikholm <hjalle@@canit.se>

     @item Finnish translation updated by Mika Lundell <c71829@@uwasa.fi>

     @item Italian translation reworked by Luca Nora <ln546991@@silab.dsi.unimi.it> and Giovanni Addabbo <gaddabbo@@imar.net>

         @item Slovenian translation by Damir Arh <damir.arh@@guest.arnes.si>

         @item Dutch translation updated by Leon Woestenberg <leon@@stack.nl>

@end table

@item Christian Hattemer <chris@@heaven.riednet.wh.tu-darmstadt.de> for StormC source descriptors and updating german catalog

@item Sven Steiniger <ss37@@irz301.inf.tu-dresden.de> for the new source descriptor for E programmers (E32e.sd)
      

@end table

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@node History
@chapter History of development
@cindex History
@cindex Changes

The history of FlexCat development is logged in the file @file{FlexCat.history},
which is integral part of the distribution archive.

@headings off
@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@contents

@bye
